# The Purpose of Baptism, the Effect of Baptism and Who to Baptize in the New Testament and Other Early Christian Writings

## Introduction

This document is written to look at the historical practice of Christian
baptism, especially as it relates to the purpose and effect of baptism
and who should be baptized. The purpose of this document is not to look
at the mode of baptism. It is plain from the New Testament and the early
Christian writings that baptism was normally done with the person in the
water. It seems most likely to me that this was by immersing the person,
however I suppose it is possible for the person to have been drenched by
having water poured over them while standing in the water. However, it
does not seem that the focus of the New Testament references to baptism
are on the mode but on the purpose and effect of baptism.

I do not like the word baptize, as it is just a transliteration of the
Greek word *baptizo* (*βαπτίζω*) and does not really convey the meaning of the Greek word,
which means to dip, to immerse or to soak. However, I am using the word baptize in this document so as not to
distract away from the focus of this document with issues related to
mode of baptism.

## Baptism in the New Testament

The first mention of baptism in the New Testament is John's baptism of
many Jews. This is recorded in Matthew 3:1-12, Mark 1:4-8, Luke 3:1-21,
John 1:19-31 and John 3:22-24. John was baptizing "Jerusalem and all
Judea and all the region about the Jordan," according to Matthew and
"all the country of Judea and all Jerusalem," according to Mark. Luke
tells us that "all the people," including the tax collectors but
excluding the Pharisees and lawyers had been baptized by him (Luke 3:21
& 7:29). Matthew tells us that John was baptizing for repentance (3:11)
and that the people being baptized were confessing their sins (3:6).
Mark tells us that John's baptism was a baptism of repentance for the
freedom from sins (3:4) and also that the people being baptized were
confessing their sins (3:5). Luke also tells us that John's baptism was
a baptism of repentance for freedom from sins (3:3). John records that
John the Baptizer declared that the purpose for which he came baptizing
was "that he \[Jesus\] might be revealed to Israel."

Into that context, Jesus came to be baptized by John. This is recorded
in Matthew 3:13-17, Mark 1:9-11, Luke 3:21-22 and alluded to in John
1:32-34. John was initially hesitant to baptize Jesus, recognizing that
he should be baptized by Jesus. However, Jesus said, "Let it be so now,
for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness." (Matthew
3:15) Two remarkable events are recorded about Jesus's baptism. The
first is that the Holy Spirit descended on Jesus like a dove. The second
is that a voice from heaven identified him as God's son with whom God
was pleased. It is worth nothing that although Jesus did not have sins to turn from 
and his was not a baptism of repentance, that he still chose to wait to be
baptized until he was an adult. If baptism as children were what God expected
of the children of Christian parents (as he did of circumcision for the Jews), then it seems strange that Jesus was not baptized as a child.

The next explicit mention of baptism in the New Testament is Jesus's
disciples baptizing large numbers of people, which is mentioned in John
3:22-4:2. It seems at this point that more people were going to Jesus to
be baptized than to John. This passage also points out that Jesus was
not doing any of the baptizing but his disciples were.

After Jesus's resurrection, he gave his disciples what people often call
the great commission, recorded in Matthew 28:18-20. Jesus summarizes
making disciples of all nations as "baptizing them in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit" and "teaching them to
observe all that I have commanded you." A similar passage is present at
the end of some Greek manuscripts of Mark (16:15-18). In that passage
Jesus said, "Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved, but whoever
does not believe will be condemned." This is the first passage in the
New Testament to explicitly relate baptism and salvation. However, Jesus
makes a statement in John 3:5 that seems to tie baptism with entering
the kingdom of God: "Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of
water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God." The early
Christians Justin[^1] (writing in the middle of the second century),
possibly Irenaeus[^2] (writing in the second half of the second century)
and Tertullian[^3] (writing in the very early third century) relate this
verse to baptism. Later references to this verse in the early Christian
writings also relate it to baptism.

The next reference to baptism in the New Testament is in Acts 2:38-41.
In this passage, after Peter preached to the crowds on Pentecost, many
of them were cut to the heart and asked what they should do. Peter
responded by saying "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ for the release of (or freedom from) your sins, and you
will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit." Those who received his word
were baptized. Notice in this passage that those who are baptized are
those who received his word, which implies that all of them were old
enough to understand Peter's message. Repentance and baptism are closely
tied together by Peter and the reason for baptism is for freedom from
sin. As well, the result of repentance and baptism is the receiving of
the Holy Spirit.

Acts 8:12-16 records the baptism of a group of people in Samaria. Those
who were baptized were those who "believed Philip as he preached good
news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ \... both men
and women." Just like the baptisms in Acts 2, those who believed were
baptized, which obviously excludes children too young to comprehend the
message. Notice the last phrase of the previous quote: "both men and
women." Since this was presumably a large group of people, this would
have been the perfect opportunity to mention children if Philip had been
baptizing children. Luke did not need to be specific about the ages or
genders of those who were baptized. However, the fact that he was
explicit clearly excludes baptism of children in this situation. After
Philip baptized the people in Samaria, Peter and John came down and laid
hands on them for them to receive the Holy Spirit.

Shortly after this, Acts 8:36-38 records Philip's baptism of the
Ethiopian eunuch. In verse 36, the eunuch asks what prevents him from
being baptized. Verse 37, which is only present in some Greek
manuscripts, records Philip's reply: "If you believe with all your
heart." Like the two previous examples belief is closely tied with
baptism but here is even given as a condition for baptism. If belief is
a condition for baptism, than it seems reasonable to conclude that only
those old enough to believe can be baptized.

Acts 9:17-18 records Paul's baptism and Acts 22:12-16 is Paul's
retelling of the events. This baptism is associated with Paul's
blindness being healed and with him receiving the Holy Spirit. Paul's
retelling of the events gives Ananias's words to Paul: "And now why do
you wait? Rise and be baptized and wash away your sins, calling on his
name." Here baptism is for the washing away of sins, like the freedom
from sin mentioned in Acts 2. Like the previous examples of baptism,
there is an obvious immediateness to baptism in this example. Here it
even sounds urgent: "Why do you wait?" This shows that baptism in the
New Testament was not something done some long time after repentance and
clearly there were no long periods of instruction before baptism. This
passage also mentions Paul being told to call on his (presumably
Jesus's) name.

Acts 10:44-48 records of baptism of Cornelius and those with him. It
seems that everyone who received the Holy Spirit on that occasion was
immediately baptized. Those who received the Holy Spirit there were "all
who heard the word." When these events were being reported later in
Jerusalem, Acts 11:18 makes it clear that the Christians in Jerusalem
understood this baptism of Cornelius and the others in his house to be
associated with "repentance that leads to life."

Acts 13:24 briefly mentions that prior to Jesus, "John had proclaimed a
baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel." Here again baptism
and repentance are connected together.

Acts 16:14-15 records the baptism of Lydia and "all her house," presumably
referring to other members of her family or others (perhaps slaves) who
lived with her. This passage mentions that God opened Lydia's heart "to
pay attention to what was said by Paul." This is the first of a few
passages used by those who promote the baptism of children to suggest
that children were baptized in the New Testament. However, nothing tells
us explicitly who or what is included in the phrase "all her house." We
can not say whether there were children in her house. Even if there
were, it is a stretch to say that a phrase like "all her house"
necessarily includes children. Human language is not so precise as that
and we often interpret words and phrases based on the context in which
they are used. For example, if we read that someone escaped from a house
fire but that "all her house" was consumed in the fire, we might
reasonable assume that this could include people, animals and inanimate
objects. However, if we read that each time a woman returned to her
house she warmly greeted "all her house," we would not assume that she
was hugging her donkey or kissing her rug. In some of the previous
passages that mention John's baptism, we are told that "Jerusalem, all
Judea, and all the region about the Jordan" (Matthew 3) or "all the
people" (Luke 7) were baptized by John. However, we can see that this
does not mean that every person in that whole region, without exception,
was baptized by John because Luke 7 records that the Pharisees and the
lawyers were not baptized by John.

Acts 16:30-34 records the repentance and baptism of the Philippian
jailer and "all his," again presumably referring to others in his family
or household. This happened at once after he was told "Believe in the
Lord Jesus, and you will be saved, you and your household." This baptism
was so immediate that it happened even before the jailer took Paul and
Silas into his home and gave them food to eat. The account ends with the
statement that "he rejoiced along with his entire household that he had
believed in God." Although his household may have included young
children and even a baby, it is just as reasonable to assume that they
were not baptized along with him as it is to assume that they did not
rejoice that he had believed in God.

The next passage to mention baptism in the New Testament is Acts 18:8
which records the following: "Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue,
believed in the Lord, together with his entire house. And many of the
Corinthians hearing Paul believed and were baptized." We know from 1
Corinthians 1:14 that Paul baptized Crispus, presumably on this occasion
mentioned in Acts 18. Notice here that "his entire house" believed. If
it is reasonable to conclude from the two previous examples that
children without understanding were baptized, then it is equally
reasonable from this passage to assume that children without
understanding believed Paul's message, which obviously does not make
sense. Notice again how belief and baptism are closely tied together.

Acts 19:1-7 records the story of Paul meeting some disciples (about 12
men) who were only baptized into John's baptism and had not received the
Holy Spirit when they believed. They were then rebaptized in the name of
Jesus and Paul laid hands on them to receive the Holy Spirit.

The beginning of Romans 6 contains a description of baptism which comes
in the context of the question of whether Christians should continue in
sin. Paul wrote the following in response to that question: "Or don't
you know that all we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized
into his death? We were buried therefore with him through baptism into
death, that just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of
the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life." Here we see that
baptism is not just symbolic of Jesus's death but is an actual
participation in his death. The effects of this baptism/death that Paul
lists are freedom from sin (verses 6 & 7), an ability to walk in newness
of life (verse 4), and an ability to take part in Jesus's resurrection
(verses 5 & 8). This passage seems to presume that the person being
baptized is not a passive participant in the baptism, as a baby would
be. It also seems to assume that the person being baptized is able to
understand sin and turn from it, which makes it unlikely that Paul has
baptism of young children in mind.

As mentioned earlier, 1 Corinthians 1:13-17 contains a list of people
that Paul baptized (Crispus, Gaius and the house of Stephanas). The
context of this passage is division that was happening in Corinth. Paul
seems to have intentionally de-emphasized who was doing the baptism to
avoid the focus of baptism being on who performed the baptism.
Presumably the other people in Corinth who were baptized while Paul was
there were either baptized by a travelling companion of Paul or by one of
the newly baptized disciples in Corinth.

Later in 1 Corinthians 12:13, Paul wrote this about baptism: "For in one
Spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks,
whether bond or free; and were all given to drink into one Spirit."

In the context of a discussion about the resurrection of the body, Paul
mentioned in 1 Corinthians 15:29 baptism "for the dead." Whether there
was some practice of people being baptized on behalf of others who had
already died or not is not clear from the passage. Tertullian seems to
have the earliest discussion of this passage[^4]. Tertullian argued that
Paul was referring to baptism of the body since it is the body which
becomes dead. If there was some practice of early Christians of being
baptized on behalf of others who had already died, there is no reference
to such a practice elsewhere in the New Testament or other surviving
early Christian writings. It seems unlikely that Paul would have
approved of such a practice given the strong association of baptism with
repentance and believing that we see in the New Testament.

In Galatians 3, in the context of discussing the law of Moses and the
unification of Jews and non-Jews, Paul said that, "as many of you as
were baptized into Christ have put on Christ." (Galatians 3:27) Like
Romans 6, Paul describes baptism as something that unities us with
Christ, not just something where we identify with him.

In Colossians 2:11-12, Paul associated (and possibly even equated)
circumcision with baptism. Here he wrote that the disciples were buried
with Christ and raised with him in baptism. He further states that this
was done through faith in the working of God. If Paul considered baptism
to be the New Covenant parallel of Old Covenant circumcision, he does
not appear to see it as parallel in every way. Not only does he not even
suggest that baptism should only be done to males, but he says that
those who Christ has circumcised "were dead through your trespasses and
the uncircumcision of your flesh." Clearly he does not have in mind a
practice that was in every way parallel to the practice of circumcising
all Israelite males, even children; Israelite children were not
circumcised because they were dead through their trespasses, nor were
they circumcised through faith, as they, on the eighth day after birth,
had no ability to have faith.

In 1 Corinthians 10:2, Paul referred to what happened to the Israelites
when the Spirit of God descended as a cloud to protect and guide the
people and what happened when they passed through the Red Sea as baptism
into Moses. He is clearly making a parallel with water and Spirit
baptism in the New Covenant. Interestingly, just as these two events at
the Red Sea were the final acts in a process of deliverance that freed
the people of Israel from the power of the Egyptian Pharaoh, so water
baptism and baptism by the Spirit are the final acts in a process of
deliverance that frees us from the evil powers of this world and Satan.

In Titus 3:4-6, Paul wrote the following: "But when the kindness of God
our Savior and his love toward mankind appeared, not by works of
righteousness, which we did ourselves, but according to his mercy, he
saved us, through the washing of regeneration and renewing by the Holy
Spirit, whom he poured out on us richly, through Jesus Christ our
Savior." This passage does not use the word commonly translated as
baptize but the phrase "washing of regeneration" is a reference to
baptism. Since the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, baptism and
receiving the Holy Spirit are almost always closely associated with one
another, although they are obviously separate events. The early
Christians repeatedly used the term regeneration to refer to
baptism[^5]. In Titus 3, Paul taught that the disciples had been saved
not by righteous deeds but by baptism and the transforming power of the
Holy Spirit[^6].

The connection between washing and salvation or delivery from sin is
also mentioned in 1 Corinthians 6:11 and Ephesians 5:26. This washing
with water is also mentioned in Hebrews 10:22.

Hebrews 6:1 lists instruction about baptisms as one of the foundational
teachings that make up the elementary doctrine of Christ.

The final passage in the New Testament about baptism is 1 Peter 3:18-22.
In this passage, where the context is suffering for doing good, Peter
teaches that just as Noah was saved through water, so disciples are now
saved through baptism[^7]. Those who teach that baptism has no part in
salvation have to ignore the clear teaching of this passage. "Baptism
now saves you" is clear enough. However, Peter clarifies that baptism
does not save by the removal of dirt from the flesh but by the appeal to
God for a clean conscience. In other words, baptism is not just a
magical ritual which can save someone just by washing their body with
water. Rather it is an act which is an appeal or answer to God for a
clean conscience and therefore it is God who saves us through baptism,
not the water. In the same way, it was God and not just a boat that
saved Noah from the flood and it was God and not just a flood that saved
Noah from wicked people. The final point that Peter makes about baptism
is that it saves through the resurrection of Jesus the anointed one[^8].

Throughout the New Testament baptism is usually associated with a
conscience response to God, either repentance or belief (which really
should not be seen as separate things). After Pentecost, baptism is
almost always associated with the work of the Holy Spirit. At times this
coming of the Holy Spirit is even referred to as being baptized with the
Holy Spirit. Baptism is repeatedly said to be for release from or
freedom from sins. Putting all of these elements together, baptism is a
simple act which a person makes when he believes God's message and
decides to repent. This act is an appeal to God for a clean conscience.
This act is a participation in Jesus's death and in his resurrection; it
is both a drowning (to cause death) and a washing (to clean). God then
regenerates this person by his Spirit. The combination of these things
creates a new person who is no longer in bondage to sin but is freed to
live a new life by the power of God's spirit. Each person has a small
part to play in this process. God has a part to play which is much
larger than our part but he has chosen to make his action dependent on
our submission to him in obedience. Just as Naaman the Syrian had to dip
himself seven times in the Jordan river in order for God to heal him of
leprosy, so we need to dip ourselves in water in the name of the Father,
Son and Holy Spirit if we want God to heal us of the disease of sin
which has, at some point, infected us all.

There are no explicit examples in the New Testament of young children
being baptized. The things required of those who are to be baptized can
not be required of young children. The arguments of some that children
are implicitly referred to in vague references to baptizing groups of
people are weak and not consistent with the evidence we have from the
scriptures. The only way children could be seen to be included in the
passages we have looked at is by their inclusion in two analogies used:
physical circumcision and the passing through the Red Sea, both of which
clearly involved children. If these analogies are intended to imply that
New Covenant baptism is for children who can not understand or repent,
then it seems strange that we find no examples of this in the New
Testament. If somehow, this practice was left out of the New Testament,
then we should at least be able to find some reference to it in the
early Christian writings from an early date.

## Baptism in the Early Christian Writings Outside the New Testament

That baptism of children was practised by some, maybe even many, who
professed to be Christian in the third century and later is well
established by the historical evidence[^9]. An especially interesting
point of evidence in this question is the so-called *Apostolic
Tradition* (also called the *Egyptian Church Order*). This anonymous writing
is sometimes attributed to Hippolytus of Rome and suggested dates range
from the early third century to the late forth century. This writing is
sometimes quoted in defence of baptizing children because it explicitly
mentions this practice. As well, if it was complied by Hippolytus of Rome (which
it very likely was not), it would probably be the earliest surviving
writing promoting children being baptized[^10]. However, the very
detailed description of baptism that it gives requires mixed-gender,
completely nude, baptism and this is insisted on quite
emphatically[^11]. I am not aware of any group today that uses this mode
of baptism. How anyone can read this document and seriously think this
is maintaining a tradition started by Jesus is a mystery to me. However,
to use it to promote infant baptism while ignoring other things it says
about baptism seems to me to be careless at best. At worst, it is
dishonest.

We are left with the question of whether this third century practice of
baptizing children was a practice continued from the beginning or if it
was a novelty introduced by men. No surviving first or second century
early Christian writings that I am aware of explicitly mention baptism
of children. Some people believe that Irenaeus refers to baptism of
children in his work *Against Heresies[^12]*. In the context of arguing
that Jesus lived to be about 50 years old (as opposed to the Gnostic
idea that he died at exactly 30 years of age), Irenaeus writes this:

> Being thirty years old when He came to be baptized, and then possessing
the full age of a Master, He came to Jerusalem, so that He might be
properly acknowledged by all as a Master. For He did not seem one thing
while He was another, as those affirm who describe Him as being man only
in appearance; but what He was, that He also appeared to be. Being a
Master, therefore, He also possessed the age of a Master, not despising
or evading any condition of humanity, nor setting aside in Himself that
law which He had appointed for the human race, but sanctifying every
age, by that period corresponding to it which belonged to Himself. For
He came to save all through means of Himself---all, I say, who through
Him are born again to God---infants, and children, and boys, and youths,
and old men. He therefore passed through every age, becoming an infant
for infants, thus sanctifying infants; a child for children, thus
sanctifying those who are of this age, being at the same time made to
them an example of piety, righteousness, and submission; a youth for
youths, becoming an example to youths, and thus sanctifying them for the
Lord. So likewise He was an old man for old men, that He might be a
perfect Master for all, not merely as respects the setting forth of the
truth, but also as regards age, sanctifying at the same time the aged
also, and becoming an example to them likewise. Then, at last, He came
on to death itself, that He might be "the first-born from the dead, that
in all things He might have the pre-eminence," the Prince of life,
existing before all, and going before all.

Whether Irenaeus was thinking of the baptism of children when he wrote the above quote or not I am not
sure. There is nothing explicit in the quote to refer to the baptism of children.
One alternative possibility is that he is referring to a general
saving of children through the work of Jesus. Another possible
explanation of what he means is that he is referring to children who
will eventually be saved when they are older. Some of Irenaeus's
other references to baptism seem to suggest that he understands baptism
to be something received by those who have obtained an age where they
have fallen into sin and then been able to receive the rule of
truth[^13]. He also seems to refer to water and spirit baptism as being
imparted to those that believed without mentioning the obvious exception
for children[^14]. Given that Irenaeus's argument in the above excerpt centres around Jesus passing through every stage to sanctify every stage, it is interesting that Irenaeus makes
no comment on Jesus's decision to not be baptized until he was an adult. Had Irenaeus 
been thinking of the baptism of children as a normal Christian practice, it seems 
strange that he would have not commented on this.

Prior to Irenaeus, *The Shepherd of Hermas*, *The Letter of Barnabas*,
Justin's *First Apology* and his *Dialogue with Trypho* all
discuss baptism. Not only do they not mention baptism of children but
they describe baptism in a way that seems to suggest they are not
considering baptism as including children.

In *The Shepherd of Hermas*, Hermas says to the heavenly
messenger of repentance, "I heard, sir, some teachers maintain that
there is no other repentance than that which takes place, when we
descended into the water and received remission of our former
sins."[^15] It is hard to imagine that Hermas has in mind here the
baptism of children who make no repentance and have no former sins to be
freed from.

Along a similar line, *The Letter of Barnabas* says in
chapter 11 (a chapter dealing with baptism), "Blessed are those who have
set their hope on the cross and gone down into the water" and "we go
down into the water full of sins and pollution, and we come up bringing
forth fear in our hearts and with hope in Jesus in our spirit." You
could not reasonably say that a young child goes down into the water
with their hope set on the cross nor that they are full of sins and
pollution. The context of these is clearly referring to someone
responding in faith to God, something a young child can not do.

Justin's *First Apology*, has a detailed description of baptism
for a non-Christian audience. His description is clearly of those old enough to understand and choose:

> How we dedicated ourselves to God when we were made new through Christ I
will explain, since it might seem to be unfair if I left this out from
my exposition. Those who are persuaded and believe that the things we
teach and say are true, and promise that they can live accordingly, are
instructed to pray and beseech God with fasting for the remission of
their past sins, while we pray and fast along with them. Then they are
brought by us where there is water, and are reborn by the same manner of
rebirth by which we ourselves were reborn; for they are then washed in
the water in the name of God the Father and Master of all, and of our
Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit. For Christ said, "Unless
you are born again you will not enter into the Kingdom of heaven." Now
it is clear to all that those who have once come into being cannot enter
the wombs of those who bore them. But as I quoted before, it was said
through the prophet Isaiah how those who have sinned and repent shall
escape from their sins. He said this: "Wash yourselves, be clean, take
away wickednesses from your souls, learn to do good, give judgment for
the orphan and defend the cause of the widow, and come and let us reason
together, says the Lord. And though your sins be as scarlet, I will make
them as white as wool, and though they be as crimson, I will make them
as white as snow. If you will not listen to me, the sword will devour
you; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken these things." And we learned
from the apostles this reason for this \[rite\]. At our first birth we
were born of necessity without our knowledge, from moist seed, by the
intercourse of our parents with each other, and grew up in bad habits
and wicked behavior. So that we should not remain children of necessity
and ignorance, but \[become sons\] of free choice and knowledge, and
obtain remission of the sins we have already committed, there is named
at the water, over him who has chosen to be born again and has repented
of his sinful acts, the name of God the Father and Master of all. Those
who lead to the washing the one who is to be washed call on \[God by\]
this term only. For no one may give a proper name to the ineffable God,
and if anyone should dare to say that there is one, he is hopelessly
insane. This washing is called illumination, since those who learn these
things are illumined within. The illuminand is also washed in the name
of Jesus Christ, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and in the name
of the Holy Spirit, who through the prophets foretold everything about
Jesus.[^16]

Justin's description would be very strange if he had been aware of a
normal practice of baptizing children. His contrast of our first birth
of necessity (that is, not of our choice) and our second birth of free
choice and knowledge makes this especially clear.

Justin follows up his description of baptism by saying the following:

> We, however, after thus washing the one who has been convinced and
signified his assent, lead him to those who are called brethren, where
they are assembled. They then earnestly offer common prayers for
themselves and the one who has been illuminated and all others
everywhere, that we may be made worthy, having learned the truth, to be
found in deed good citizens and keepers of what is commanded, so that we
may be saved with eternal salvation. On finishing the prayers we greet
each other with a kiss. Then bread and a cup of water and mixed wine are
brought to the president of the brethren and he, taking them, sends up
praise and glory to the Father of the universe through the name of the
Son and of the Holy Spirit, and offers thanksgiving at some length that
we have been deemed worthy to receive these things from him. When he has
finished the prayers and the thanksgiving, the whole congregation
present assents, saying, "Amen." "Amen" in the Hebrew language means,
"So be it." When the president has given thanks and the whole
congregation has assented, those whom we call deacons give to each of
those present a portion of the consecrated bread and wine and water, and
they take it to the absent.
>
> This food we call Eucharist, of which no one is allowed to partake
except one who believes that the things we teach are true, and has
received the washing for forgiveness of sins and for rebirth, and who
lives as Christ handed down to us. For we do not receive these things as
common bread or common drink; but as Jesus Christ our Saviour being
incarnate by God's word took flesh and blood for our salvation, so also
we have been taught that the food consecrated by the word of prayer
which comes from him, from which our flesh and blood are nourished by
transformation, is the flesh and blood of that incarnate Jesus.[^17]

Again Justin's description clearly implies a person able to make a
conscious choice. It is interesting too that he says things like "the
whole congregation present assents." This shows that either children
were not present for this meeting or that Justin is not so slavishly
literal as those who try to argue that baptizing "whole households" must
necessarily mean the children too.

Justin tells Trypho the Jew that, "Thus it is that we have believed through the baptism of
repentance and knowledge of God, which was instituted for
the sins of the people of God, as Isaias testifies, and we know
that that same baptism which he announced, and which alone
can purify penitents, is the water of life."[^18]
Again we see here the strong connection between repentance, baptism and
cleaning of sin. Justin does not seem to be considering that people too
young to repent could be baptized.

Later, Justin tells Trypho that "our Christ, by being crucified on the
tree, and by purifying \[us\] with water, has redeemed us, though
plunged in the direst offences which we have committed."[^19] This quote
seems to presume that those being baptized were old enough to have plunged themselves into the direst
offences. He also says the following in the same work: "the whole earth,
as the Scripture says, was inundated, and the water rose in height
fifteen cubits above all the mountains: so that it is evident this was
not spoken to the land, but to the people who obeyed Him: for whom also
He had before prepared a resting-place in Jerusalem, as was previously
demonstrated by all the symbols of the deluge; I mean, that by water,
faith, and wood, those who are afore-prepared, and who repent of the
sins which they have committed, shall escape from the impending judgment
of God."[^20] Again repentance is tied to baptism, even using the same
symbolism of the flood as Peter does in 1 Peter.

Another early Christian writing commonly called *The Didache* or *The
Teaching of the Twelve Apostles* contains a description of baptism. *The
Didache* seems to be composed of two different documents. The first is a
description of the way of life and the way of death. The second part is
a description of the how a local assembly should function. The writing
is anonymous and commonly suggested dates for the composition of the
second part (which is the part that mentions baptism) range from the
mid-first century to the late second century. The part of the document
about baptism comes immediately after the Two Ways section. Here is the
relevant material:

> Now about baptism: this is how to baptize. Give public instruction on
all these points, and then baptize in running water, in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. If you do not have running
water, baptize in some other. If you cannot in cold, then in warm. If
you have neither, then pour water on the head three times in the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Before the baptism, moreover, the one
who baptizes and the one being baptized must fast, and any others who
can. And you must tell the one being baptized to fast for one or two
days beforehand.

This instruction obviously assumes the person being baptized is mature
enough to fast. There is no exception given for what to do with
children, which would not make sense if children were commonly being
baptized. As well the instruction to "give public instruction on all
these points" seems to assume the person being baptized is old enough to
be instructed.

Theophilus of Antioch, writing a defence of Christianity to a friend
named Autolycus, describes baptism this way: "Furthermore, those created from the waters were
blessed by God so that this might serve as a pattern of men’s future
reception of repentance and remission of sins through water and
a bath of regeneration, in the case of all who approach the
truth and are reborn and receive a blessing from God."[^21]
Theophilus seems to follow the frequent pattern we have seen up to this
point of connecting baptism, repentance and freedom from sin.

Clement of Alexandria's writings contain two relevant references to
baptism. The first is from *The Exhortation to the Greeks*[^22]:
"'Become righteous,' says the Lord. 'You
that are thirsty, come to the water; and as many 
as have no money, go and buy and drink without 
money.' It is to the font, to salvation, to enlightenment that He invites us."
Although this
reference is more subtle than some of the others, it still connects
baptism with a desire to change.

One very interesting discussion of baptism in Clement's writings is too
long to reproduce in full here. It is from his writing called *The
Tutor[^23]* and the relevant section is book 1, chapter 6[^24]. The
context seems to be answering the Gnostic criticism that Christians had
received spiritual but imperfect knowledge but that perfect knowledge
was given to the Gnostics. Apparently some Gnostics were saying that the
Christians were like immature children. Clement's response is to point
out that all true Christians are children in the sense of innocence and
in the sense of being taught but not in the sense of ignorance or
immaturity. In that context, Clement says the following:

> In the same way that inexperience yields to experience, and
impossibility to possibility, so darkness is completely dispelled by
light. Darkness is ignorance, for it makes us fall into sin and lose the
ability to see the truth clearly. But knowledge is light, for it dispels
the darkness of ignorance and endows us with keenness of vision. The
very act of expelling things that are bad reveals what is good. To be
sure, the things that ignorance restricts, to our harm, knowledge sets
free, for our good. The quickest way to loose those bonds is to make use
of man's faith, and God's grace, for sins are forgiven through the one
divine remedy, baptism in the Word. All our sins, in fact , are washed
away; instantaneously we are no longer bad. This is one grace of
enlightenment, that we no longer are in the same state as before we were
cleansed. Even before this teaching was given us, we who were
uninstructed, but were learning, heard that knowledge is engendered
together with enlightenment, bathing the mind in light. Yet, no one
could say just when. Instruction is given to engender faith, but faith
comes by the Holy Spirit and by baptism.

Like the previous quotes, this one seems to assume that people being
baptized are able to immediately come to knowledge and faith. The
context makes this especially interesting because Clement is discussing
the way in which Christians are children and it would seem very strange
in that context to make no mention of literal children being baptized
and becoming Christians.

## Summary

The consistent evidence from the New Testament and other early Christian
writings is that baptism was originally understood as something which,
in combination with repentance and faith would result in a release from
sins. Closely associated with this was the promise of receiving the Holy
Spirit. This whole process, made possible by God but initiated by a
person through the commitment of baptism, results in the miraculous
death and rebirth of a person. Modern ideas of baptism that make it
simply a symbol of the new birth, sometimes supposedly happening long
after the new birth, are not consistent with the pattern set by the
earliest Christians.

From the beginning baptism was an act of commitment or appeal to God by
people who were able to make such a commitment. Prior to the third
century, there are no recorded examples of baptism being performed on
children who could not understand. The references to baptism prior to
the third century, although they do not explicitly exclude children,
seem to assume someone who can understand. Some of the main arguments
that can be offered in support of baptism of children---the baptism of
whole households and the lack of explicit prohibition---can be equally
made to support the idea of baptizing animals, old people who have
become demented and dead bodies. To me, these arguments seem too weak to
overturn the clear and consistent example of baptism being an act of
repentance and faith towards God on the part of the person being
baptized. Likewise, to use aspects of Old Testament symbols such as
circumcision and Israel passing through the Red Sea to justify baptizing
children also seems to me to be too weak to justify understanding
baptism as not always being associated with repentance.

If we had any examples from the New Testament or the other earliest
Christian writings of children being baptized or of any instruction
being given on the conditions for baptizing children, then this would
weaken my argument (significantly so if it was from the New Testament).
If the writings from these times mentioned exceptions to the general
pattern of baptism being associated with repentance, this too would cast
question on my argument. However, the facts we have are that we have no
writing before the third century promoting or even explicitly mentioning
baptism of children. When we consider that these writings were mostly
preserved by the Roman state church[^25], which practised baptism of
children, this is a serious problem to overcome for those who want to
promote the baptism of children as the historic Christian practice.

The mentions of baptism of children in the third century are really the
best evidence that can be put forward to support the idea that Jesus
instituted that practice. Given the amount of time that had passed, this
would be weak evidence even without all the teaching on baptism before
that, which seems to implicitly exclude children. This evidence is
especially weak when we consider some of the evidence that the original
traditions of the early Christians were not universally preserved very
faithfully that far out. For example, by Polycarp's time (early second
century) there was significant disagreement between the Christian
assembly in Rome and some in Asia Minor about when to keep the Passover.
Both sides strongly appealed to tradition to defend their positions. By
the beginning of the third century, the overseer of Rome temporarily
excommunicated whole groups of Christians for not celebrating Passover
on the same day that he did. Not only does this show that the Roman
overseer was disconnected from the core of Jesus's message (not to
mention the explicit teaching of Paul on the topic) but it shows that a
tradition that was not established by Jesus had risen to such importance
that people were willing to divide over it. When we consider that five
of the seven Christian assemblies that Jesus wrote to in the beginning
of John's Revelation were called to repentance for some major deviations
from his message, it should not surprise us if even something as
important as baptism could be twisted by many people by the third
century.

If Christians had been normally baptizing children from the beginning,
these baptisms would likely have represented the majority of the
baptisms in the first and second centuries[^26]. I find it unbelievable that
when it comes to something as important as baptism that we would find no
record of such a thing for almost two centuries after Jesus, given all
the writings we have from that era. It is a much more reasonable
conclusion that the original practice of baptism being done as an act of
repentance and commitment to follow Jesus had been distorted by the
third century to make it simply a rite of initiation for children not
needing repentance.

[^1]: Justin's *First Apology*, chapter 61.

[^2]: From a fragment which is from a catena on the book of Kings in the
    Coislin Collection, which claims to preserve a fragment of a lost
    writing by Irenaeus. See *Ante-Nicene Fathers*, Volume 1, page 574.

[^3]: Tertullian's *A Treatise on the Soul*, chapter 39 & *On Baptism*,
    chapter 12 & 13.

[^4]: See Terullian's *Against Marcion*, book 5, chapter 10.

[^5]: See, for example, Justin's *First Apology*, chapter 61 & 66;
    Irenaeus's *Against Heresies*, book 1, chapter 21; book 3, chapter
    17; book 5, chapter 15; Theophilus of Antioch's *Apology to
    Autolycus*, book 2, chapter 16; Clement's, *The Tutor (*also called
    *Paedagogus* or *The Instructor*), book 1, chapters 6, 12 & 13

[^6]: This passage is often misused to teach that our works play no part
    in our future or final salvation (that is, our acceptance on
    judgment day). However, this passage is not in any way discussing
    the final judgment. It is simply pointing out that the initial
    salvation of the Christian is through the mercy of God working
    through baptism and the renewing work of the Holy Spirit.

[^7]: Not only was Noah saved from the flood by the ark but he was saved
    from wicked people by the flood.

[^8]: Possibly what he says means that the appeal or answer to God is
    through the resurrection of Jesus but this does not probably make
    any practical difference to understanding this passage.

[^9]: See for example, Origen's *Homilies on Leviticus* 8:3, Origen's
    *Commentaries on Romans* 5:9 and Cyprian's *Letters* 64.

[^10]: Tertullian's *On Baptism*, chapter 18 mentions children being
    baptized but seems to argue against it as an unwise and unnecessary
    practice. This passage, written around the beginning of the third
    century is the earliest explicit reference to baptizing children
    that I am aware of.

[^11]: See *The Apostolic Traditions*, chapter 21.

[^12]: See Against Heresies, book 2, chapter 22.

[^13]: See *Against Heresies*, book 1, chapter 9 & book 5, chapter 15.

[^14]: See *The Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching*, chapters
    41 & 42.

[^15]: *The Shepherd of Hermas*, forth commandment.

[^16]: Justin's *First Apology*, chapter 61.

[^17]: *First Apology*, chapter 65 & 66.

[^18]: *Dialogue with Trypho*, chapter 14.

[^19]: *Dialogue with Trypho*, chapter 86.

[^20]: *Dialogue with Trypho*, chapter 138.

[^21]: *Apology to Autolycus*, book 2, chapter 16.

[^22]: Also known by the name *Exhortation to the Heathen* or by its
    Greek name *Protrepticus.* This quote is from chapter 10 of that work.

[^23]: Also known by the names *The Instructor*, *The Educator* or its Greek
    name *Paedagogus*.

[^24]: This can be read in *The Ante-Nicene Fathers*, book 2, pages
    215-222 or in *Clement of Alexandria: Christ the Educator*, volume
    23 of *The Fathers of the Church* series, pages 24-49.

[^25]: Since the Roman state church was practising baptism of children,
    they would have no motivation to intentionally corrupt or hide
    writings that supported this practice.

[^26]: If families who became Christian normally baptized their children when they were baptized, and most families had more children than adults (as would normally be the case) and if Christian parents normally baptized their children, then baptisms of children would outnumber the baptisms of adults, probably by a large number.
