## Is the mission of InterVarsity the same as the mission of Jesus?

I was involved with IV for over 3 years in college and was president of
my chapter in my last semester. After graduating in 2005, I spent a
total of about 3 years as campus staff and 2 years as volunteer staff. I
loved when students came alive during manuscript study. But my favorite
part of being staff was doing outreach with my students in the community
center on campus. What I loved about InterVarsity was how *active* we
were. Some of the churches I'd been in struggled to engage much in the
mission of Jesus. But InterVarsity was a community of *doers*.

However, in 2016, I began to look more closely at ***what Jesus
actually commanded the church to do***.

I started to realize that the mission of InterVarsity was not
necessarily the same as the mission of Jesus. There was some *overlap*,
but it wasn't the same mission. Here's what I mean:

Jesus commissioned us to go and make disciples of all nations...

1.  Baptizing them, and
2.  Teaching them to *OBEY ALL HE COMMANDED* (Matthew 28:19-20)

That is what Jesus said to do. *Those who believe the gospel must be
baptized and must learn to live the life of love Jesus taught*. If we,
and the people we disciple, do not learn to obey all Jesus commanded, we
fail to accomplish the task Jesus has given us.

Was InterVarsity engaged in this mission? What were we actually DOING as
an organization?

Well, there *was* certainly a lot happening on campus. We were training
students to share their faith. We were teaching them how to lead
manuscript bible study. We were going on retreats and service projects.
We were addressing systemic injustice and racism. There were lots of
exciting conversations happening with curious and skeptical students.

All of this activity made me *feel* like I was deeply engaged in the
mission of Jesus.

However, we were not even attempting to teach people to obey all or even
most of what Jesus actually commanded.

InterVarsity's Great Commission looks something like this:

Go and make disciples all over your campus...

1.  Teaching them basic Protestant theology
2.  Teaching them manuscript bible study and evangelism tactics
3.  Teaching them about systemic injustice and racial reconciliation

God uses these things, of course. And some of these things *overlap*
with the mission of Jesus. Systemic injustice, for example, is a result
of sin, and sin must be repented of. And it helps to learn methods for
sharing our faith with people, of course.

But none of these things were explicitly commanded by Jesus.

Have you read some of what Jesus commanded recently? It truly is a
narrow path that only a few find.

For example, Jesus taught nonviolence. He said not to resist evildoers
and to turn the other cheek. He said to love our enemies. Jesus modeled
this in his nonviolent life and in his suffering and death. 1 Peter
tells us that Jesus's suffering was an example for us to follow, not
only an atoning sacrifice.

Well guess what! The early church *actually obeyed!* They taught
nonviolence for the first three centuries. For them, Christians were not
allowed to fight or kill in the military or in self-defense. They
followed the teaching and example of the King and overcame evil with
good.

Jesus also said not to store up wealth for ourselves, to sell
possessions and give to the poor, and said that divorce and remarriage
is adultery. He said never to take an oath. He said to get sin out of
our lives whatever it takes. He said not to be distracted by the world,
but to stay awake and ready for his return.

Were we taking these things seriously at InterVarsity?

I had to admit that we were not, and neither was my local
non-denominational church.

As staff, I was storing up wealth for myself, was planning to remarry,
and would have had no problem with my students joining the military or
taking self-defense classes. Taking oaths? What's wrong with that? I was
not teaching them to obey Jesus. My example was actually teaching them
to *ignore* him! I didn't help them to *break free* from worldly
distractions - I was distracted myself! *In* *theory* I was committed to
Jesus. *In reality* I was probably more committed to movies and hobbies
than to living as Jesus commanded.

I, and most of my fellow staff, would have been told to repent or even
excommunicated by the early Christians for multiple reasons. We were
well meaning, but badly deceived.

InterVarsity (as well as most churches in this country) generally does
not produce the kind of disciples Jesus and the apostles did. Today's
Christians often lack the loving, reverent, uncompromising obedience and
devotion to Jesus the New Testament calls us to. But we *are* capable of
that. We have access to the same Holy Spirit who radically transformed
the apostles and their disciples all those centuries ago.

The problem is that we've inherited a compromised form of Christianity.
At first, being a Christian required total allegiance and obedience to
Jesus. Over time, the church began to focus more on theological
controversies than on faithful obedience to Jesus the King. This
compromise accelerated dramatically in the 4th century. The result is
defective disciples who do not respond to Jesus as they need to. As he
said, the path is narrow and difficult. Only a few find it.
Unfortunately, many people, even people who call Jesus "Lord", even
people who work for organizations like IV, take the wide path leading to
destruction.

InterVarsity, despite the effort they put into making disciples, is
still a product of that compromised Christianity that came out of the
4th century. And so are most churches, Catholic, Protestant, or
Orthodox.

Take a fresh read through the gospels, and the rest of the New
Testament. Do whatever Jesus and the apostles say, no matter how costly
or countercultural it may seem. Don't let your Christian friends explain
it away for you or talk you out of it. Do this, and you will become just
as much an alien in this world as those early Christians were. And if
you can get the others in your InterVarsity group to join you in this,
you may start a movement on your campus and beyond that looks very much
like that amazing community we read about in the book of Acts.
